---
layout: post
title: "poker diaries, volume 1: the beginning"
date: 2024-06-28 11:00:00 -0800
comments: true
draft: true
published: false
categories: poker
tags: poker
group: poker
---

## how i got here

This summer, for the first time in my life, I'll be making a living as a
full-time professional poker player. In this series I'll be recording my
experiences, explaining what I'm working on, and hopefully convincing family and
friends that I'm not a degenerate gambler along the way.

Things fell through this summer. I thought I had a couple internships lined up
where I would make good money, but due to a combination of bad luck and some
unforced errors (I've never been good at dealing with bureaucracies), I found
myself with an unexpected summer off.  I decided to make the most of it and
spend the summer playing poker, something I've been wanting to do for a couple
years now.

## a word on poker

Before getting into the nitty gritty, I want to say a few words about poker.
Poker is gambling, full stop. However, it is _positive edge_ gambling for a
skilled player, meaning that a good player should profit in expectation.  This
is because we are playing against other players, not the house. The house can
make a bit of money off of each pot, but as long as we can beat the other
players for more than the house is taking, we can also profit.

I mention this because many folks do not realize that poker is fundamentally a
game of strategy. You _can_ make a profit (assuming your opponents are making
mistakes, and they definitely are). Outsiders often group poker with craps,
blackjack, slots, etc, (i.e., pure games of chance), where the player will lose
in the long run. However in poker you can build a _strategy_, and if your
strategy is better than your opponents or if implement it more accurately, you
can make money.

Poker is fundamentally a game of decision making in the presence of incomplete
information, and with incomplete information comes variance. I will make the
best decisions I can given the partial information I have, and sometimes I'll be
horribly wrong, and sometimes I'll be horribly right. But if I'm good enough,
I'll be right just a little more than I'm wrong, and over time I will win money.

## variance

Variance will be a big part of this series: in some sense, a professional poker
player is exchanging variance for expected profit. Recreational players get
enjoyment from the thrill of gambling, and pros sell recreational players this
thrill in exchange for an expected profit, or what we like to call an _edge_.
A pro might lose a lot of money to a recreational player over the course of any
given session, and the chance this can happen is essentially what the pro is
selling.  However, in the long run, the recreational is going to lose money, and
lots of it.

Every decision we make in life is subject to variance. Which school we go to,
where we work, who we date, etc. Does your kid keep you up all night or does she
sleep soundly through the night? Variance.

As an example, my partner and I, who already knew each other through a mutual
friend, saw each other on the train one day. We'd never really gotten on before,
but she saw me and texted me to come sit down next to her. I did, and we ended
up having a great conversation. I left the train with a burgeoning crush, and a
couple months later we went on our first date.

## what goes into being a pro?

First, a lot of study and hard work. Poker is a complex game, filled with
nuances. A pro needs to learn theory so they can understand the fundamental
mechanics of different spots and how to navigate uncertainty with the minimum
risk and the most upside. A pro also needs to learn about their biases. Humans
are not good at reasoning about risk. Some of us are risk averse. Some of us are
comfortable taking risks. None of us are perfectly balanced. And our biases
change depending on the situation.

For instance, I just quit a session because I was tired and making poor
decisions.  I was getting irritable at people playing poorly, even though that's
who I make my money off of (this is all online so we weren't communicating, I
was just alone in my room grumbling to myself).  I folded some hands that had
enough equity to continue because I was feeling risk averse and didn't want to
make tough decisions later.

In short, I was playing at about 70%, and I'm just not good enough yet to be
able to play profitably when I'm at that level.

<!-- Graveyard -->

We can make all the right choices and still lose.  We can do everything wrong
and win. We all know that life isn't "fair". That is because of variance.

Anyway, back to my unemployment: I suddenly had a summer off and I needed to
make money. I've ground my way up to being a profitable, though inconsistent,
poker player. I haven't always had a ton of time to invest into playing, but
when I do I've found myself getting better and better. I have a relatively
strong theoretical background, but I also have strong intuition, and I like
to combine these things to solve problems in real time. This is essentially what
the day-to-day life of a poker player is all about: solving problems.

So I decided to invest some of my savings into an online poker site and start
playing full time.

I started off slow. Lower stakes ($25 buyins), maybe a few hundred hands a day.
I will play up to 4 tables, but at first I'd only play one or two, and really
focus on my decisions. I did that for a couple weeks, slowly getting back into
the game, and I now feel like I'm just about ready to start playing full time
again.

